here are some images of clusters of
galaxies they're exactly what they sound
like there are these huge collections of
galaxies bound together by their mutual
gravity so most of the points that you
see on the screen are not individual
stars but collections of stars or
galaxies now by showing you some of
these images I hope that you will
quickly see that galaxy clusters are
these beautiful objects but more than
that I think galaxy clusters are
mysterious they're surprising and
they're useful useful as the universe's
most massive laboratories and as
laboratories to describe galaxy clusters
is to describe the experiments that you
can do with them and I think there are
four major types and the first type that
I want to describe is probing the very
big so how big well here is an image of
a particular galaxy cluster it is so
massive that the light passing through
it is being bent it's being distorted by
the extreme gravity of this cluster and
in fact if you look very carefully
you'll be able to see rings around this
cluster now to give you a number
this particular galaxy cluster has the
mass of over 1 million billion suns it's
just mind-boggling how massive these
systems can get but more than their mass
they have this additional feature they
are essentially isolated systems so if
we like we can think of them as a
scaled-down version of the entire
universe and many of the questions that
we might have about the universe at
large scales such as how does gravity
work might be answered by studying these
systems so that was very big the second
thing is very hot ok if I take an image
of a galaxy cluster and I subtract away
all of the Starlight what I'm left with
is this big blue blob this is in false
color it's actually x-ray light that
we're seeing and the question is if it's
not galaxies what is emitting this light
the answer is hot gas million-degree gas
it's in fact it's plasma and the reason
why it's so hot
goes back to the previous slide there
the extreme gravity of these systems is
accelerating particles of gas to great
speeds and great speeds means great
temperatures so this is the main idea
but science is a rough-draft
there are many basic properties about
this plasma that still confuse us still
puzzle us and still push our
understanding of the physics of the very
hot third thing probing the very small
now to explain this I need to tell you a
very disturbing fact most of the
universe's matter is not made up of
atoms you were lied to
most of it is made up of something very
very mysterious which we call dark
matter the dark matter is something that
doesn't like to interact very much
except through gravity and of course we
would like to learn more about it if
you're a particle physicist you want to
know what happens when we smash things
together and dark matter is no exception
well how do we do this to answer that
question I'm going to have to ask
another one which is what happens when
galaxy clusters collide here is an image
since galaxy clusters are representative
slices of the universe scaled-down
versions they are mostly made up of dark
matter and that's what you see in this
bluish purple the red represents the hot
gas and of course you can see many
galaxies what's happened is a particle
accelerator at a huge huge scale and
this is very important because what it
means is that very very small effects
that might be difficult to detect in the
lab might be compounded and compounded
into something that we could possibly
observe in nature so it's very funny the
reason why galaxy clusters can teach us
about dark matter the reason why galaxy
clusters can teach us about the physics
of the very small is precisely because
they are so very big fourth thing the
physics of the very strange certainly
what I've said so far is crazy ok if
there's anything stranger I think it has
to be dark energy if I throw a ball into
the air I expect it to go
up what I don't expect is that it go up
at an ever-increasing rate
similarly cosmologists understand why
the universe is expanding they don't
understand why it's expanding at an
ever-increasing rate
they give the cause of this accelerated
expansion a name and they call it dark
energy and again we want to learn more
about it so one particular question that
we have is how does dark energy affect
the universe at the largest scales
depending on how strong it is maybe
structure forms faster or slower well
the problem with the large-scale
structure of the universe is that it's
horribly complicated here is a computer
simulation and we need a way to simplify
it well I like to think about this using
an analogy if I want to understand the
sinking of the Titanic the most
important thing to do is not to model
the little positions of every single
little piece of the boat that broke off
the most important thing to do is to
track the two biggest parts similarly I
can learn a lot about the universe at
the largest scales by tracking its
biggest pieces and those biggest pieces
are clusters of galaxies so as I come to
a close
you might feel slightly cheated I mean I
began by talking about how galaxy
clusters are useful and I've given some
reasons but what is their use really
well to answer this I want to give you a
quote by Henry Ford when he was asked
about cars he had this to say if I had
asked people what they wanted they would
have said faster horses today we as a
society are faced with many many
difficult problems and the solutions to
these problems are not obvious they are
not faster horses they will require an
enormous amount of scientific ingenuity
so yes we need to focus yes we need to
concentrate but we also need to remember
that innovation ingenuity inspiration
these things come when we broaden our
field of vision when we step back when
we zoom out and I can't think of a
better way to do this than by studying
the universe around us thanks
you